#title 오바마와 2MB의 생각의 차이

=== 오바마의 생각 ===
It's not because John McCain doesn't care. It's because John McCain doesn't get it. For over two decades, he's subscribed to that old, discredited Republican philosophy -- give more and more to those with the most and hope that prosperity trickles down to everyone else. In Washington, they call this the Ownership Society, but what it really means is that you're on your own. 
 
'''맥케인이 관심이 없어서 그런게 아닙니다. 맥케인이 몰라서 그러는겁니다. 20년동안 그는 이 낡고 신용하기 어려운 공화당의 철학을 지지해왔습니다. 부유한자에게 더 많이 주어라, 그리고 희망을 가져라. 모든 사람들에게 부의 콩국물이라도 떨어질 것이라고. (* 내 생각 : 부시의 그리노믹스를 맹렬히 비판하고 있다 )'''

'''워싱턴에서 그들은 이것을 소유사회(개인의 소유를 지극히 인정하는 개념) 라고 부릅니다. 그러나 이것이 정말로 의미하는 것은 당신은 당신 스스로 알아서 해라는 뜻입니다.'''

Out of work? Tough luck. You're on your own. No health care? The market will fix it. You're on your own. Born into poverty? Pull yourself up by your own bootstraps -- even if you don't have boots. You are on your own.

'''일자리가 없다고? 운이 나빴군요. 당신 알아서 하세요. 건강보험이 안된다고? 시장이 고쳐줄 것입니다. 당신 알아서 하세요. 가난하게 태어났다고? 혼자 '힘' 으로 당신을 일으켜 세우세요- 당신이 '힘' 이 없더라도. 당신 알아서 하세요.'''

Well it's time for them to own their failure. It's time for us to change America. And that's why I'm running for president of the United States.

'''이제 그들은 자신들의 실패를 책임져야 할 때가 왔습니다. 이제는 미국을 바꿀때가 왔습니다. 이것이 제가 미국 대통령 출마에 나선 이유입니다.'''

(중략)

What is that American promise ? It's a promise that says each of us has the freedom to make of our own lives what we will, but that we also have the obligation to treat each other with dignity and respect.

'''미국의 약속이란 무엇입니까? 그것은 바로 우리 모두가 스스로 원하는 대로 삶을 만들어갈수 있는 자유이며, 동시에 존엄과 존경으로써 다른사람을 대해야 하는 의무입니다.'''

It's a promise that says the market should reward drive and innovation and generate growth, but that businesses should live up to their responsibilities to create American jobs, to look out for American workers, and play by the rules of the road.

'''이것은 약속입니다; 시장은 혁신하고 성장을 만들어내야 하지만, 업들은 책임 또한 다해야 합니다 - 미국의 일자리를 만들고, 미국의 동자를 돌보며, 정도에 따른 행동을 하는 책임을.'''

Ours is a promise that says government cannot solve all our problems, but what it should do is that which we cannot do for ourselves -- protect us from harm and provide every child a decent education; keep our water clean and our toys safe; invest in new schools and new roads and science and technology.

'''이것 또한 우리의 약속입니다. 정부가 우리의 문제를 모두 해결 할 수는 없지만, 정부는 국민들이 스스로의 힘으로 할 수 없는 것을 해주어야 합니다 - 위험으로부터 보호하며, 모든 아이들에게 남부럽지 않은 교육을시켜주며, 우리의 물을 깨끗이 하며, 우리의 장난감을 안전히 하며, 새로운 학교와 도로와 과학과 기술에 투자하는 것을.'''

Our government should work for us, not against us. It should help us, not hurt us. It should ensure opportunity not just for those with the most money and influence, but for every American who's willing to work. 

'''우리의 정부는 우리를 위해 일해야지, 우리의 반대편에 서서 일하면 안됩니다. 우리의 정부는 우리를 도와야지 우리를 해를 입히면 안됩 니다. 우리의 정부는 돈과 영향력을 가진 사람들 뿐만 아니라 일하고 싶어 하는 모든 미국인에게 기회를 보장해야 합니다.'''

That's the promise of America -- the idea that we are responsible for ourselves, but that we also rise or fall as on-e nation; the fundamental belief that I am my brother's keeper; I am my sister's keeper.

That's the promise we need to keep. That's the change we need right now. So let me spell out exactly what that change would mean if I am president.

이것은 미국의 약속입니다 - 우리가 스스로를 책임져야 하지만, 국가처럼 성공하기도 하고 실패하기도 한다는 것. 내가 내 형제들의 보호자이며, 내 자매들의 보호자라는것. 그것이 우리가 지켜야할 약속입니다. 그것이 우리에게 당장 필요한 변화입니다.

'''이제, 제가 대통령이 되면 이 "변화" 라는것이 무엇을 뜻하는지 정확히 설명드리도록 하겠습니다.'''
 
Change means a tax code that doesn't reward the lobbyists who wrote it, but the American workers and small businesses who deserve it.

'''변화라는 것은 로비스트에게 이익을 주는 세금법이 아니라 미국의노동자와 영세사업자와 같은 받을 자격이 있는 사람들에게 이익을 주는 세금법을 의미합니다.'''

You know, unlike John McCain, I will stop giving tax breaks to corporations that ship jobs overseas, and I will start giving them to companies that create good jobs right here in America.

I'll eliminate capital gains taxes for the small businesses and the start-ups that will create the high-wage, high-tech jobs of tomorrow.

'''아시다시피, 저는 맥케인과는 달리, 일자리를 외국으로 옮기게 만드는 기업의 세금감면을 중단할 것 입니다. 미국에서 좋은 직업을 만들어내는 기업들에게 세금감면을 줄 것입니다. 저는 영세사업자들과 높은 임금을 주는 일자리와 하이테크 일자리를 만들어 낼 기업을 시작하는 자들의 양도소득세를 없앨 것입니다.'''

I will, listen now, cut taxes -- cut taxes -- for 95 percent of all working families. Because in an economy like this, the last thing we should do is raise taxes on the middle-class.

'''저는 95%의 일하는 가족을 위해 세금을 내릴것입니다. 이러한 경제상황에서 우리가 가장 피해야 하는것은 중산층의 세금을 올리는 것이기 때문입니다.'''

(하략)

=== 2MB의 생각 ===
구구절절하게 적기 싫어서, 간단 요약.
 * 내가 집권하면 임기내 주가 5000 달성.
 * 7% 성장, 국민소득 4만불, 세계 7대 강국
 * 비핵.개방.3000 ??
 * 결론 돈다발을 안겨드리겠다.
 * '''소고기? 먹기 싫으면 안 사 먹으면 되지 ?'''
결론 돈다발을 안겨드리겠다. 늬들 알아서 생존해라.

대통령을 뽑았는가 ? 장사꾼을 뽑았는가 ?
